# Gymble
Social Application created to meet fellow members of similar gyms and work ethics

# Compilation Instructions:

NOTE: Servers are no longer active and application requires log in to use

Libraries used (libraries were acquired through the built-in Maven search in IntelliJ):

com.amazonaws:aws-java-sdk-s3:1.11.43
com.guicedee.services:jakarta.xml.bind-api:62
org.neo4j.driver:neo4j-java-driver:4.1.1
JUnit 5
Ensure JavaFX is installed, and in the VM Options in Run>Edit Configurations in IntelliJ, put --module-path "C:\Path to JavaFX\lib" --add-modules javafx.controls,javafx.fxml JavaFX must also be a library in the Project Structure. To set this library open File>Project Structure>Libraries, then with the little "+" sign, add a library from Java which will you will find under your Path to JavaFX\lib
To compile from the source, you must install the libraries above in IntelliJ. Add the moviecache and placeholder image to your out/production folder in your project. From there it should run in IntelliJ, if you want to pack it into a JAR you must follow this workaround to package the JavaFX.

## Description
   If anyone else is like me, getting the motivation to go to the gym is a tall task, even before the workout has begun. A large factor that pushed me to get to the gym was a social aspect of being able to workout with a group of friends. The gym no longer becomes a spot just to get physically fit, but to socialize and drive each other to do the best we can. Creating an application that can connect people that are looking to get the motivation to hit the gyms by using social aspects of having compatible friends and groups could lead to a large motivation boost for those struggling to get started. 
  
   To tackle the gym motivation and connection problem, I created the app Gymble. The definition of a “gymble is to get together for a light gym session with good friends” (Marymcdme, 2019), which seemed like the perfect representation of this app. There is a diverse population in who decides to go to the gym, from infrequent weightlifters to regular gym attendees, and not all attendees have the same levels of devotion. Gymble will give gym participants of all intensities the ability to find someone to fill the gap they need to find a sense of social commitment and achievements. The inspiration for this app is to motivate people to find a sense of community within their gym, and to make the gym a social experience for those who desire. 

   The driving functionality behind the idea was straight forward, create an app where an individual is presented with the profiles of other users that are in a similar situation of wanting to find new gym users. This was fully implemented into the app by searching through the gym that a user is a member at, to find the fellow members from their home gym, and present them to all the user to decide if they would like to match and potentially work out together. The design choice of restricting users to only be shown other members at a specific gym came down to two reasons, gym preference and locality. Being a member at a gym comes with a fee that is often not a light amount of money, and the locality of the gym is often a factor for many people when selecting where they wish to join. With this thought in mind, it became apparent to me that many gym users are not looking to leave their gym and pay new fees elsewhere in order to potentially find someone to work out with as it is not always a cheap or convenient transition. With the issue of locality, a gym session for a lot of people will be an add on in their daily schedule and having a convenient location to travel to can make or break the motivation to attend for some. A personal experience of this for myself was when I had a friend attempt to convince me to attend a workout at the PAC rather than my local gym, which is only a few blocks away with easily accessible parking. This factor alone was enough to push me away from going to the PAC, even without the factor of fees being a concern. Focusing the user on a familiar environment where there are no extra fees than their usual memberships seemed like the best route to take when designing who a user should be shown. With these shown members, the interface and usage for the user is kept as simple as possible with a yes/no decision based on another person’s profile for the potential of both saying yes, and finding that new workout buddy. 
  
   Within the ability of finding people comes the idea of obtaining matches through viewing other members profiles and having the ability to show off your own. With the user’s profile they are given a few features to try and create an appealing profile to get as many matches as possible, or at least get the important match that leads to a connection. The profile features standard information such as a name, age, profile picture, home gym, bio, and contact information. Depending on the status between two users (potential match, match, or friends) will dictate how much information will be shown to other users. While using the finding people functionality and seeing potential match profiles, the user will only see a name, age, bio, and home gym to keep some more revealing information private. Once they have become a match, the user will then be able to see the specific username to further add the match as a friend. Once two users are friends, all the information in their profiles will become accessible in order to contact each other and make appropriate plans. While this functionality does not always create a grander scale of community with this initial connection, the more matches each user gets the stronger the webbing of matches within a gym and therefore growing his or her community.
  
   The main engagement strategies that will be applied will be a subset of Cialdini’s Principles of Persuasion and the BJ Fogg Behaviour Model for motivation (Vassileva & Humu-Haida, 2016-17). Beginning to put yourself into an open gym environment can be a big step to exposing your physical abilities that can often lead people to being anxious. In the BJ Fogg model, this would leave people feeling rejected and fearful rather than accepted and hopeful, which will be an obstacle to overcome. This app is a step in finding an acceptance within a group by finding other new gym goers or just a very welcoming group of current gym enthusiasts, paving a way to become hopeful about one’s future in the gym. A factor in this app is purely the social aspect that will lead to reciprocation, consensus, and commitment. When a member of one’s group or a friend makes the suggestion to go for a gym session, it becomes tougher to say no immediately, especially if you have multiple people in agreement to go to the gym. Using Cialdini’s principles of reciprocation and consensus, the initial making of plans becomes a much more influential activity than it would be to plan it out on your own. Making plans to go to the gym is significantly easier than following up on those plans. If one has made a commitment with friends within their gym group, it makes the follow up on these plans significantly more important than just deciding to not go on one’s own. Having a dedicated time period for which one’s group will be attending the gym also creates a sense of urgency behind a workout, as the idea of working out alone outside of that window may not be nearly as enticing as a workout with a supportive group. Gymble would be able to push these principles by giving those who may not have had a group, a new support system to push them to be their very best. For the individual user it allows for them to see their active growth within their workouts, leaving a user with a sense of satisfaction.

   One of the technologies I discovered while determining how to create a server for a social network was a graph database. A free product called Neo4j to create a social network that connected a large number of users through relationships while not needing to store large amounts of data. Using the graph query language Cypher, this database is able to quickly query different nodes and their relationships to keep lots of the relational functionality on the back end of the app. One of the restrictions that comes with this graph database was the inability to store images in an efficient capacity without using large amounts of storage space. My work around of this issue came with the addition of an Amazon Web Services S3 server used for storing each user’s profile picture under a unique key. Being able to connect the app through the unique key, each user will begin with a default profile picture key and then assign their unique profile picture through a file chooser after their account has been created. Each of these unique profile picture keys will still be stored in the Neo4j user node to maintain where their picture is stored. In front of both these servers, the base app was made using Java, with all the user interface made in the library JavaFX. The last minor technology I learned to use for this application was implementing the SHA-256 algorithm in order to hash all the passwords with unique salts in order to add a level of security to each account within the database. Other than Java and the JavaFX library, the rest of these technologies were brand new to me and felt like a great learning experience to finally get some hands-on experience with setting up and managing a database, with the extra special aspect being, it was a graph database. 
  
   Gymble was developed with a large emphasis on creating a graph database using relationships to find and connect individuals while using a model view controller architecture (MVC 2020). Using this architecture came with some variation that I had never worked on before, more specifically the addition of many views with a unique controller attached to each view. Traditionally having worked on rather simple apps on Android Studio with only one view or controller with unique states to differentiate the views, this new style felt as though it brought a much more organized approach. The model only featured two key static classes, the user, and the server. All important information could either be stored with the user upon log in, with varied points to refresh a server call in order to stay as up to date as possible, or it would have a call to the server for quick and easy queries. Each view was maintained with a FXML file with a Java class controller made specifically to handle all the internals of that single view. This allows for dynamic and organized classes while keeping stored data to a minimum and queries to remain simple. With a large amount of the app’s management being controlled by updating and querying relationships as a large branching social network, using the relationships to identify all other users with potential match, swiped, matched or friend status from a user’s perspective is done in an easy to access fashion. 
  
   When testing my app, I was fortunate enough to get a group of ten peers which consisted of both avid gym users and those who have never owned a membership. Having made a simple survey for these testers to fill out after exploring the app’s current functionality, I was able to receive some feedback on both how they believed it would affect the community of a gym as well as what kind of functionality they would like to see in the future. A key result I found between two questions was out of the seven individuals who said they currently (or pre-COVID-19) are members at a gym, only two of those individuals do not currently have a workout partner or group. While both the two testers that currently attend a gym on their own said they would be interested in Gymble, looking at the current gym users that have a workout group or partner that said they would still use it seemed like an interesting outcome. The results showed four out of those five testers said they would still use it to develop more relationships at their gym, rather than just sticking within their current groups. I found this to be a very intriguing result as it shows how Gymble could stay relevant for more than just a one time use of finding an initial gym partner but rather growing that gym community. With 60% of all results claiming they believe gymble would help create that sense of community and 30% saying that it possibly could, testers seemed to think it would be able to create that sense of community as it was intended. Now looking at the result of 90% of testers saying they would rather attend a gym with a sense of community, Gymble appears to achieve the exact social influences it was intended to accomplish. A consistent piece of feedback from the survey was the request for some extra functionality to make the app more diverse than just a way to find and meet other people, which in its current state would have had to include a third-party way to communicate just to meet their current matches. 
  
   One of the aspects about this app that I believe to leave a lot of room for potential is the amount of functionality that can be added to the app to create even more of an interconnected community within a gym. There are a few key features I would have loved to implement, yet with time constraints I was unable to add. The biggest missing feature in my opinion and was requested for in the feedback of the testing was the chat function for the use of being able to create a dialogue between matches or friends within the app. Being able to keep conversations more on topic and organized would make the app more efficient in its social goals as less workout plans would be buried within a chat. Another feature that would have been tightly connected with the chat would be the use of a scheduler between users, giving a designated and specific function just to make sure plans cannot be missed. An extension of these functions could also be added to encourage a group chat and scheduler between multiple friends, as workout groups are of course not restricted to just being partners. For each user’s profile they are currently given a bio that can contain whatever information the user desires but having a unique field strictly for personal records and weight goals was another piece of functionality that was requested a few times during testing. Having the ability to find someone else in the same weightlifting class as you could be an important factor for some, especially for those in powerlifting and more competitive levels of weightlifting. The last key feature that I would personally love to add into the app would be the ability for gym owners to take control of an account associated with their own gym. Giving the owners or managers the ability to have a feed of important gym events, membership, and product sales, or even promoting gym challenges could add a personal aspect from the staff that can create a unique connection between the employees or owners and their members that could have been missed in the past. After personally having gone to a local gym in the city where the owner runs the gym himself with very few employees and a very loyal membership, it gave a sense of familiarity in the gym that just could not be captured at some of the bigger establishments. If Gymble is able to bring that same feeling into all gyms regardless of the size of staff or membership, it would be achieving the very task it set out to do by making everyone it can be more comfortable in what could usually be an intimidating or scary experience for lots of new goers. 
  
   Many of the obstacles I faced while creating this app began with a lack of understanding about what a graph database can and cannot store, and how to optimize the relationships between each node. Regarding each profile associated with a user, my plan was to store their profile pictures in each user node and create specific nodes for chat and planning functionality between two users in a unique node with connections only to the users involved. This idea was quickly changed when every tutorial on how to store pictures and files quickly became storing links to a secondary database, which is why I used an Amazon S3 server to store all the profile pictures uploaded by users. When it came to storing information through relationships, I used a directional graph with relationships only being identified through their labels. After some learning of how relationships can store their own attributes and are able to be queried in a non-directional form, given a second attempt I would have been able to reduce all relationships by half. The last big obstacle I faced was early in the term when it came to setting up the server in a public way. In order for the testers to work on the same database, I had to turn my desktop into a Neo4j server for the app to connect to. After learning more about how to properly host servers with necessities such as port forwarding, back to the basics such as minor lessons about IP addresses. 
  
  Looking back on the project through out the term, majority of my app development went remarkably smoothly for a project of this size, and I believe my choice of using a graph database was a huge success for me. The main things I could have improved on would have been my graph optimization, as well as allocating more time to implement all the features I wish could have been on the app. With the potential of Gymble’s features and functionality, it could give current goers a new incentive by having friends share in your accomplishments, and potentially even create a friendly competition situation for those who have similar routines, and both push themselves to a new level. In its current state, Gymble manages to push the social aspect of reciprocation, consensus, and commitment in one’s gym experience by introducing a plethora of new users to other motivated individuals just one’s self. 

References
Marymcdme. (2019, June 9). Gymble. Retrieved from https://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=Gymble 

MVC: Model, View, Controller. (n.d.). Retrieved December 06, 2020, from https://www.codecademy.com/articles/mvc
Vassileva, J. & Humu-Haida S. (2016-17) PT and Gamification

Link to Demo and Survey Results
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1YBTBP4pzY7PH_3kXkqsOl6KGFl1rCPpp?usp=sharing


